once around 51 pegasai.
So 51 peg is a star magnitude 5 and a
half. So just visible to the naked eye
on a good day with nice clear skies just
outside the square of Pegasus. You can
see it marked on the map there and with
a telescope image of the star. So you
should be able to find this one. and
it's one of the sun's near neighbors
distance around 50 light years away as
tracked by the parallax method using
things like the hippoc satellite and the
GIA satellite with even greater accuracy
we can uh triangulate and find the
distance
so it's been given a name Helvetios from
Helvetian a Celtic tribe that used to
live in Switzerland land in antiquity.
And that was suggested and agreed by the
2016 International Astronomical Union
Working Group on star names, which has
agreed the names for a lot of these
stars. Um, I'm never going to be able to
remember them all, but uh we can always
look them up in the catalog, I suppose.
Anyway, it's good that they're giving
them names.
It's a sunlike star. This makes it very
interesting from our point of view.
Spectral type G2V.
So G type yellow dwarf stars as they're
known. G2 is exactly the same as our
sun. And the temperature is very very
similar 5768
Kelvin. So almost identical to that of
the sun, although it is a little bit
larger. The mass is 109%, the radius
115%.
And being a bit bigger, it spins
slightly slower, taking 37 days, not the
uh 27 that our sun takes.
And it's tipped over right at 79° from
our line of sight. So, we're almost
looking at it pole on.
We estimate that uh it's about 140% the
uh power output of our sun and slightly
older 4.8 billion years. So just uh one
galactic year older than the sun which
is about 4.6 billion. So just a couple
of hundred uh million years time to
orbit the galaxy once. Now curiously it
is slightly richer in the metal content.
The heavier elements like iron seem to
be overabundant by about 18%. And that's
curious in that it's roughly the same
age and if anything slightly older. And
the metal content should
all things being equal gradually
increase with time and therefore stars
that were born more recently should have
more. And this one was born longer ago
so should have less. But it just goes to
show that uh the universe is a very
chaotic and messy place and that that
rule of thumb isn't brilliantly
accurate.
Now we can actually look for what's
going on on the surface of this star.
Amazing to think that we can do that.
And we find that there are very very few
star spots visible on it. So it's
possible that being like the sun it is
in a m minimum period. This happened
between about 1650 and uh getting on
into the early part of the 1700s around
1720 where the number of sunspots
visible on our star seem to drop to
almost nothing rather than cycling in a
fairly regular 11-year pattern as it now
has been observed to do ever since. But
for uh probably good getting on for a
hundred years, there were almost none.
And uh so it seems that there is a
possibility that that's what's happening
to 51 Pegasai at the moment as well.
It won't be too long before we'll be
able to see if that changes. I suppose
in astronomical terms, 50 or 100 years
is not really very long at all.
But what makes this star particularly
interesting is that it was the first one
where we found an exoplanet, a planet
orbiting a star other than the sun. And
this dates back to the 6th of October
1995 when uh Mayor and Quaos Dda Quaos
at the bottom there on the left hand
side uh were using the telescope and the
spectrometer that you see there in the
image uh in the uh uh in France and they
were awarded the Nobel Prize in 2019 for
the first discovery of a a planet
orbiting an ordinary star. There have
been some detections of planets orbiting
things like pulsars slightly earlier,
but this was the first main sequence
star to have a planet around it
detected.
So 51 Pegasai B was the designation and
informally it was originally suggested
it have the name Bolerafon for the rider
of the winged horse Pegasus. given that
this was in the constellation of Pegasus
but the IAU has now decided to call it
Didium
which refers to half and that is because
of the mass of this planet which is
around half the mass of Jupiter but
somewhat uh inflated in diameter. It's
only half the mass but occupying uh
double the diameter which means eight
times the volume. So this is actually
really quite a low average density and
that is driven by the fact that it's
close to the star and being heated to a
cloud top temperature of 1,200°
centigrade Celsius
much much hotter than uh something like
Jupiter which is really at quite a a low
temperature at its cloud tops. And so of
course the gas laws being what they are,
if you heat a gas, it expands. So the
whole thing has blown up due to the heat
and puffed up to this much larger size.
Now we are getting good at being able to
look at the spectrum of the light from
these exoplanets now. And we can see a
little bit of a trace of water, just a
trace, not very much, but also possibly
silicates, silicon dioxide and metal
silicates. So dust essentially sand and
dust and grit in the clouds and that's
fairly typical of these objects that are
at these high temperatures. We seem to
be finding that quite a lot these days.
Now I said that this high temperature is
because of the distance. It is in fact
uh 120th of the earth sun distance from
the star to the planet. So 0.058 05 AU
and just takes 4.2 days to go round. So
that's eight times closer to the star
than Mercury is to our sun. Uh so no
wonder it's at this very very high
temperature. And it seems strange that
you have a gas giant this close into a
star because
our theory was that gas giants formed
out in the cold where all the volatile
gases could condense to form these large
worlds and that that meant being a long
way from the star. And so it's possible
that this planet 51 Pegaside B Dimidium
and many other so-called hot Jupiters
have in fact spiraled in towards the
sun. And we think Jupiter did this in
our system. They do it as they're
growing, as they're picking up more and
more material. It acts like a friction
break as the planet is plowing through
the disc of gas and dust.
trapping it, making itself larger, it
loses momentum and ends up spiraling in
towards the star, sweeping inwards and
feeding on yet more material. So, as
long as there is more material, it will
continue to spiral inwards. But if it
reaches a point where there is none,
then the process comes to a halt.
Unfortunately for us, Jupiter is still
out where it is. Otherwise, uh things
like the Earth would have been wiped out
by it.
So,
that's probably what's happened here and
that this planet has swept all the way
in to this ridiculously close distance.
Now, getting that close to the star
means that it may well have suffered
loss of quite a substantial proportion
of its original mass, vaporized and
boiled away into space, uh, creating a
huge comet-like tail behind this
enormous inspiring world. So, it would
grow and then get too close to the star
and get heated and start shrinking
again. And uh that could mean that this
object 51 Pegasai B was in fact a much
more massive
gas giant or even a brown dwarf early on
in its existence and a huge amount of
material may have been stripped away
leaving just the small core.
And it's interesting that although we
know quite a lot about 51 Pegasai and
about planet B, Dimidium,
we don't know it yet of any other worlds
in that system.
There's no planet C, D, and E yet. And
we're also very interested to see
whether or not any of these planets that
might be there could in fact have their
own moons. But that's another story
which we'll get back to in a later
video. So, thanks very much for
listening and I hope you've enjoyed that
trip once around 51 Pegasai B.